this video is brought to you by
manscaped
in Hollywood's early years homosexuality
found its way on screen in ways both
secret and obvious to the filmmakers
behind the camera audiences rarely
pushed back against these depictions but
those who did were loud if not Legion
women's suffrage groups in the Catholic
Church were the most dedicated to
removing gay and lesbian content from
Hollywood movies and with the
institution of the motion picture
production code they more or less
succeeded filmmakers could now be fined
or blacklisted for including gay and
lesbian characters in their movies and
some films such as Dracula's daughter
were heavily edited to remove any overt
lesbian content but go figure a bunch of
people who came up in the industry
through artistic Roots knew how to
manipulate literary devices in visual
language to still include gay themes and
characters in their movies
though in much less obvious ways along
with World War II and a coming end to
what was referred to as the Golden Age
of Hollywood a time of gay invisibility
had swept over the industry but it was
an invisibility that you could see
through if you knew how to look but
before we explore the queer coding of
the Aging days of the golden age of
Hollywood first a word from our sponsor
this video is brought to you by
manscape.com manscaped has been known
for years for their lawnmower hair
trimmer that leaves men's private bits
Nick free but who wants to shave your
face with the same razor that you use to
shave your balls that's nasty so now
they're introducing the beard hedger
trimmer with a 7200 RPM Motor and
titanium coated blades that can cut
through the thickest hair in a single
stroke whether you prefer a five o'clock
shadow or a lion's mane you can choose
from 20 different lengths with the zoom
wheel that uses only one guard to
celebrate the launch of the beard hedger
manscape.com is launching the beard
hedger Pro kit which includes the beard
hedger the your shampoo conditioner oil
and Balm plus a travel case and multiple
free gifts to save 20 on the pro kit
plus get free international shipping
simply go to manscape.com and use the
promo code James S that's
j-a-m-e-s-s or visit the link in the
description join the over 8 million men
worldwide who trust manscaped I was one
of them even before they became a
sponsor today
foreign
[Music]
even though Hollywood didn't always tell
the truth this kept a lot of unwelcome
facts and small problems from getting in
the way of the American dream even
though gay and lesbian people were often
the ones who made these dreams come true
they were never a part of it it is said
that Sam Goldwin founder of Goldwyn
pictures which was one of the three
Studios that merged to create MGM once
wanted to film The Well of Loneliness by
Radcliffe Hall
but when a producer told him they
couldn't because the main character was
a lesbian Goldwyn simply responded by
saying so what we'll make her American
despite goldwyn's confusing lesbian for
Lebanese the Americanization of
lesbianism did happen and meant nothing
more than the simple refusal to deal
with it honestly it was an imitation of
the American fear of sexuality in
general and the American duplicity
regarding sexual deviance in particular
in all actuality it was the same
invisibility that gays experienced in
real life only replicated in the movies
despite this gays continued to make an
appearance as subtextual Phantoms that
represented the fear of homosexuality
itself they served as his alien life
forms that were yet firmly established
as part of the culture in every Walk of
Life and they formed the shadowy
counterpart to the concept of the
American dream sissies and tomboys were
used as yardsticks for what was deemed
acceptable behavior in a culture that
was so preoccupied with the upkeep of
sex norms and the celebration of
everything masculine one performer who
happily ignored these sex Norms was
Greta Garbo whose performance as Queen
Christina in the film of the same name
released in 1934 was a challenge to the
standards of sexual and gender behavior
that were considered acceptable at the
time it was the Collision on screen of
her own androgynous aesthetic with the
reality of Christina's affinity for
masculine clothes and activities that
gave the picture a realism that was
uniquely its own Garbo who would Express
her desire to be in a film version of
Oscar Wilde's The Picture of Dorian Gray
with herself in the title role in
Marilyn Monroe as a young girl ruined by
Dorian created a particular dynamic in
Queen Christina one that penetrated the
queer Erasure of the script her forlorn
longings to escape her gloomy Destiny of
marriage and her skillful rejection of a
series of male suitors are broken in the
first part of the film by her encounter
with the Countess EBA Spar played by a
Elizabeth young their brief scene
together is charged with sexuality and
real affection in that scene Garbo lifts
the emotional barriers to characterize
her encounters with mail suitors Abba
suggests brightly that they go for a
sleigh ride but Christina tells her
sadly I can't know oh why not
ambassadors treaties councils how boring
later when pressed by a Statesman to
marry and produce an heir to the throne
Christina refuses
but your majesty you cannot tie an Old
Maid
I have no intention to Chancellor I
shall die a bachelor
her need to escape the role assigned her
by life was Christina's true driving
passion
Queen Christina makes this abundantly
clear she flees into the snow later in
the film when she discovers that
ebispower has betrayed her love that is
when she meets Antonio the one man who
seems to accept her and love her for all
the things that so horrify her court but
he falls in love with her thinking at
first that she's a man
and he seems quite willing to explore
whatever this strange situation may
bring in the early days of Hollywood
queen Christina stood out due to the
fact that it included a character that
was unmistakably bisexual as well as
many instances of bisexuality in The
Narrative of the film itself at the time
the lives of notable gay men and
lesbians were either portrayed in a
manner that was drastically different
from their actual experiences or were
not addressed at all in biographical
films this straight watching of History
has only marginally changed in modern
Cinema as seen by the fact that films
such as Troy A Beautiful Mind and the
imitation game more or less ignore or
completely erase the fact that its
primary characters are gay or bisexual
it's one of the reasons why audience
members were taken aback by the lesbian
relationships that were depicted in the
favorite even in the late 2010s
audiences of historical biopics
anticipated that queerness would be
erased from historical Recreations the
Betrayal of noted persons as
heterosexual without regard for their
true to life sexuality has never been
seen as a serious offense against a
person's identity until recently not
even by the person whose life is
falsified no it was better to be
straight even queer audiences themselves
believe that especially in Hollywood's
golden age when it was a dirty secret
most people yearned to be rid of but
there was an odd dichotomy developing in
Hollywood
whereas lesbian or bisexual female
characters could be redeemed in a film
by being paired off with the right man
in the end bisexual or gay male
characters had no such luxury in the
film Adam's Rib which was released in
1949 David Wayne plays the role of Kip
who is a yardstick par Excellence
Kip serves as Katherine Hepburn's
girlfriend acting as a high-class Ethel
Mertz to her feminist Lucy Ricardo
despite Catherine Hepburn's defense
Spencer Tracy's apparent unease around
him cannot be denied as they were
leaving the room following a heated
discussion over feminism Wayne said to
Hepburn you've got me so convinced I may
even go out and become a woman when
Wayne has gone Spencer Tracy mutters and
he wouldn't have far to go either
Hepburn's Amanda can only shush him an
indication that her feminism like that
of contemporary feminists who wanted
their sons to grow up to be real men
goes only so far and breaks down at the
thought of actually obscuring sex and
gender roles altogether yet the
unyielding conviction in the masculine
role along with the hatred that this
ideology bred was about to be shaken to
its very Foundation the buddy system
that had been used during the second
world war had brought troops closer
together than they had ever been before
men who loved each other's company but
always selected women to display their
manhood were forced to confront their
innate sexuality in the all-male
atmosphere of military forces this
brought to the surface a
misunderstanding regarding men's
fundamental sexuality
the worry that these heterosexual
relationships between men may in any way
be interpreted as being gay was a very
genuine one and the movies made sure
that there was no indication of
homosexuality involved in depictions of
such Partnerships there might have been
less suspicion of homosexuality had the
level of paranoia surrounding its very
mention not been so high
in 1946 Richard Brooks's novel The Brick
Foxhole dealt with obsessive masculinity
in the military in it a gay decorator is
murdered by a soldier he brings home to
his apartment for a drink the 1947 film
adaptation Crossfire made the victim a
Jewish person and thus became an example
of Hollywood's maturity in dealing with
anti-Semitism the New York Times noted
the change in a review but said only
that the motivation for the murder had
been changed to good Advantage The
novel's crucial discussion of men's
striking out at what they fear in
themselves was omitted whenever all male
circumstances were the topic of the
movies whether they were Cowboys sports
or Soldiers the fantasy of the
unfettered perennially youthful man in
pure and unsullied Brotherhood battled
over the ever-present societal taboo
against male closeness director Clarence
Brown toyed with this in his film flesh
and the devil in which John Gilbert and
Lars Hansen play lifelong friends who
separate when one of them marries the
woman they both love played by Greta
turbo by the end of the film Garbo has
slept with both of them precipitating a
reluctant duel between the two men
trying to stop them she falls through
some thin ice and drowns at this the men
throw down their guns Embrace and walk
off into the sunset together their arms
around each other their bond rejoined
following the intrusion of a woman
Clarence Brown spoke of the situation in
an interview you can see my problem
how to have these two Leading Men wind
up in each other's arms and not make
them look like a couple of fairies Joan
Mellon in her study of masculinity in
the movies Big Bad Wolves says that the
less violent men were in their film
personas The more likely they were to be
interested in heterosexual love just the
opposite has been true for homoeroticism
the perception of homosexual feelings as
a brutal furtive dangerous Force
flourished in films about male bonding
and violence playing off of the idea of
homosexuality being innately Criminal
gentlemen in the movies Jimmy Stewart
and any movie about small town USA would
never even subtextually approach such
relationships or feelings the concept of
the gentleman who chooses to love other
men did not exist in American Film
except in comedy in the films of Laurel
and Hardy their relationship was given a
sweet and very real loving Dimension a
classic example of this one with
unmistakably gay overtones is 1932's
their first mistake Hardy's wife
complains that he sees too much of
Laurel and not enough of her and the two
friends discussed the situation but
what's the matter with her anyway no I
don't know
she says that I think more of you than I
do of her
foreign
but we won't go into that you know what
the whole trouble is
what what you need is a baby in your
house well what's that got to do with it
well if you've if you had a baby and it
would keep your wife's mind occupied and
you could go out nights with me and
she'd never think anything about it so
they go out and adopt a baby
when they return home with it they
discovered that Hardy's wife is suing
him for divorce for alienation of
affections having named Laurel as the
other woman the remainder of the film is
a beautifully timed and performed
domestic scene with Laurel and Hardy in
bed with the baby between them the
obviousness of the coding has been
lambasted ever since the film's release
with Charles Barr in his study of Laurel
and Hardy saying that there is something
rather absurd about discussing this
seriously at all
in the often infantile pre-sexual
Nursery World in which Stan and Ollie
lived such Behavior would be natural I'd
agree that it is in fact natural but the
idea of there ever having been a
pre-sexual time is reaching
but notice that it is the naturalness of
Laurel and Hardy's behavior that Barr
and other critics choose to defend not
the sexuality and so it is indeed an
attack on americanism itself to suggest
that homosexuality is present in the
Laurel and Hearty routines in pointing
these things out one attacks the
American illusion the illusion that
there is in fact such a thing as a real
man and that to become one is as easy as
changing one's name from Marion Morrison
to John Wayne the fact is that comedy
has been able to comment on sexual roles
more readily than drama could only
because people may dismiss it as an
impossible first neglected buddy
relationships exist even in classic
cartoons while Disney may not have liked
hearing it but there are gay overtones
in the relationships of more than one
pair of beloved animated figures from
his classic years
in 1940s Pinocchio Honest John and
Gideon a fox and a cat are best friends
who procure Lost Boys for sale to an
evil Coachman who takes them to Pleasure
Island they seduce Pinocchio with the
hit song High diddly D the second line
of which is high diddly day an actor's
life is gay in Cinderella everyone's
favorite mice jock and Gus Gus volunteer
to help finish Cinderella's dress in
time for the ball
but they are quickly admonished by a
female Mouse to leave the sowing to the
women their relationship grows
throughout the film and later when
Cinderella describes how she was swept
off her feet by the handsome prince Gus
Gus puts an arm around Jock's shoulder
and holds him close
and of course from the competition there
was Bugs Bunny giddy to throw on a dress
and a wig at the first available
opportunity the real emotions in the
movies at the time with exceptions for
films like Gone With the Wind always
took place between men
men had been the important forces at
work both as instigators of all the
action and plots and as instigators of
the films themselves by deciding what
movies should and should not be made
when screenwriter Gore Vidal discussed
the script for the 1959 version of Ben
Hur with director William Weiler they
concluded that the Rivalry between Judah
Ben Hur Charlton Heston and his
boyfriend Masala Stephen Boyd was
insufficiently motivated by a single
political scene in which Ben Hur refuses
to Aid the Roman cause despite his
friend's pleas
Fidel described the problem I proposed
the notion that the two had been
adolescent lovers and now Masala has
returned from Rome wanting to revive the
love affair but Ben Hurd is not
he has read Leviticus and knows an
Abomination when he sees one I told
Weiler this is what's going on
underneath the scene
they seem to be talking about politics
but Masala is really trying to rekindle
A Love Affair
and Weiler was startled
we discussed the matter and then he
sighed well anything is better than what
we've got in the way of motivation but
don't tell Chuck
I did tell Stephen Boyd who was
fascinated
he agreed to play the frustrated lover
study his face in the reaction shots in
that scene and you will see that he
plays it like a man starving it was 1959
and filmmakers were on the verge of new
creative freedoms Vidal was saying that
it made sense that the two men should be
attracted to each other
theirs was the most vibrant and
interesting relationship in the film
Weiler later told Vidal the biggest
mistake we made was the straight love
story
if we had cut out the girl all together
and concentrated on the two guys
everything would have gone better
director Howard Hawks always
concentrated on men in his films and in
his films things went better
than in Ben Hur at least in 1948's Red
River hox's only use for Joe Andrew was
to have her tell John Wayne in
Montgomery Clift what we can already see
my bit expected trouble for days when
when anybody would have a mind would
know you two love each other yet the
nature of that love despite Cliff's
scene Persona doing for his character
what Garbo did for Queen Christina
remained hidden despite one of the most
re-watched and arguably most homoerotic
scenes in any film at the time being one
in which Montgomery Clift and John
Ireland compare their
pistols the only open acknowledgment of
the homosexuality and Buddy films came
from those critics who attributed the
misogynist attitudes of such films to
the covert gayness in them when Joseph
McBride and Gerald Perry in an interview
in film comment questioned Hawks about
the gay undertones of his films Red
River in particular Hawks told them it
was a goddamn silly statement to make
it's easy to see how directors might be
oblivious to the subtexts that are
present in their own work since
homosexuality is a viable alternative
has been repressed both in the lives of
men and in their work on screen the
taboo against male closeness is taken
far more seriously than it is in real
life where it is more likely to be seen
as a neutral gay sensibility some people
contend that there is no such thing as a
gay sensibility since the presence of
such a thing would imply the existence
of a straight sensibility which is
something that unquestionably does not
exist yet a gay sensibility can take on
various forms and it is possible for it
to be present even when there is no
indication of homosexuality either overt
or covert in front of or behind the
camera the need to conceal one's sexual
orientation for such a significant
portion of one's life is primarily
responsible for the development of a gay
Sensibility
it is a ghetto sensibility that was
developed out of the necessity to
cultivate and employ a second site that
would interpret discreetly what the
world sees and what the actual reality
may be it was gay sensibility that for
example often enabled some lesbians and
gay men to see at very early ages even
before they knew the words for what they
were
something on the screen that they knew
related to their lives in some way often
it was the simple recognition of
difference the sudden understanding that
something was altered or not what it
should be perhaps the role reversal of a
Dietrich or agarbo evoking a hidden
truth about the nature of sexuality in
general or it may have been the tone in
James Dean's voice as he zipped up the
jacket of the Dead cell Mineo in Rebel
Without a Cause And muttered
he's always called
it was the sense of Yearning that was
there in these encounters the unsaid
forbidden desires that were always there
but were always repressed even if the
parts did not fit together until years
later it was a voice that could not be
ignored with no real homosexuals allowed
on screen in the 40s and 50s sensors
often began looking for these hidden
messages
sometimes they found them even when
there were real things that were
abundantly clear in the film rope for
instance directed by Alfred Hitchcock in
1948 Farley Granger and John Dahl play
the role of two pretentious gay lovers
who on a whim murder a former Prep
School classmate
they do this because they believe they
possess a superior intellect and are not
morally responsible to a crass Society
the sensor's attention was drawn not to
the exact relationship between the
characters but rather to the discourse
between them Arthur Lawrence recalls
that when he finished his screenplay for
rope he left England for America and
while he was in America the script was
passed on by American censors rope came
from an English play called rope's end
and while I was in New York the producer
Sydney Bernstein took a few passages
from the play and put them back in the
script
so when it came back from the Hayes
office every one of those passages was
circled with the common homosexual
dialogue written in the margin and do
you know what they were it was simply
that they were saying things like my
dear boy to each other and the way that
the English talked was known as fruity
over here it's actually a long-held myth
within film circles that the reason
Hitchcock filmed rope to appear as one
long unedited take was so that sensors
would be unable to force him to cut any
perceived gay content without altering
the artistic intent of the film there
were also other more covert homosexual
relationships in Hitchcock films such as
the one between Martin Landau and James
Mason and North by Northwest and more
strikingly the one between Robert Walker
and Farley Granger in strangers on a
train nonetheless the filmmaker only
seldom offered commentary on matters of
this nature regarding his work but
Arthur Lawrence later said we never
discussed hitch and I whether the
characters in rope were homosexuals but
I thought it was apparent I guess he did
too but it never came up until we got to
Casting we'd wanted Cary Grant for the
teacher in Montgomery Clift for one of
the boys and they both turned it down
for the same reason their image
they felt they couldn't risk it
eventually John Dahl and Farley Granger
played the boys and they were very aware
of what they were doing he also stated
that Robert Walker was the one who
suggested playing Bruno Anthony as a gay
character in the film strangers on a
train the strangeness of their agreement
was emphasized by the friction that it
caused between his malignantly Faye
Bruno and Granger's golly gee tennis
player guy Haynes in compensation for
the death of Bruno's despised father guy
agreed to take the life of Bruno's
undesirable wife and put an end to guy's
marriage Bruno's homosexuality emerged
in phrases that would be used
progressively during the 50s to describe
gays as aliens because of his icy
demeanor his dark imagination and the
elitist superiority that he exuded he
was an extension of the clever but
lethal archetype Philip and
Brandon the lovers in rope were warped
individuals who murdered out of a belief
in their own moral and intellectual
superiority which they believed placed
them outside the law by existing outside
the culture such gays were able to deny
explicit homosexuality while at the same
time reinforcing specific stereotypes
this is how Oscar Wilde's The Picture of
Dorian Gray could reach the screen in
1945 shorn of its more bizarre sexual
implications while offering George
Saunders as a symbol of sophisticated
decadence
such ghettoized characters pre-saged the
gay as alien images of the 1950s and had
their roots in the same
anti-intellectualism and mistrust of
difference that had characterized the
shaping of Hollywood's image of the
normal American man the view of the
homosexual as being alien to his own
Society was also present in the constant
deletion of specific homosexuality from
the screen adaptations of literary Works
in 1945 Billy Wilder brought Charles
Jackson's novel The Lost weekend to the
screen with Ray Milland as the alcoholic
writer Don Burnham in Jackson's novel
Burnham's alcoholism stems from a
complex variety of reasons that include
a father fixation and a false accusation
of his having had a gay relationship
with a college frat brother in Wilder's
version of the Lost weekend however the
motivation for Burnham's drinking
becomes a simple case of writer's block
the only frames of reference for the
majority of gay people were these covert
signals and hidden indicators of
homosexuality in Hollywood movies the
majority of gay people learned about
themselves mostly through movies that
stated the rest of the world was
straight a documentary entitled word is
out which was released in 1977
demonstrated that the majority of gay
people living in the United States had
the misconception that they were the
only ones like them in the entire world
several years later when the Supreme
Court finally ruled that it wasn't
obscene to portray homosexual content on
screen films that were more overtly gay
helped pave the way for the
legitimization of homosexual subject
matter on screen nonetheless throughout
the early and middle part of the 1950s
the invisibility of homosexuality was
enforced with an almost fanatical
paranoia the perversity of the outsider
the Oddball or the alien screen
character was very noticeable in an era
built around rigid Conformity such as
the 1950s the equation between being
different in any way
and being gay was easy to see
in 1952's my son John Dean Jagger and
Helen Hayes played the distraught
parents of a young man who is
well not gay but a communist agent
played by Robert Walker when their
suspicions about their son's activities
are confirmed it's an American Tragedy
suddenly they see their son as Shifty
and unfamiliar a thing with no respect
for God or country an unprincipled
monster to whom they can no longer
relate
the healthy family disappears
Walker's coldness his superiority and
his open contempt for his parents and
their way of life conspire to create a
perverse unnaturalness in a 1950 New
York Times story The Republican National
committee chairman asserted that sexual
perverts who have infiltrated our
government in recent years are perhaps
as dangerous as actual Communists by
December of that year
4954 suspected homosexuals had been
removed from employment in the federal
government the lavender scare was
gripping Washington and with the help of
a future president would soon dig its
claws deep into Hollywood as well
as we close out this episode I'd like to
thank our patrons for making this series
possible YouTube isn't great when it
comes to pushing lgbtq content in fact
in most cases they try their best to
keep it hidden so our amazing patrons
are the reason that this channel keeps
chugging along
if you'd like to become a patron and
gain access to videos early as well as
patreon exclusive content like our
podcast movie watch along parties and
the amazing community on our Discord you
can sign up at the link in the
description for as little as a dollar a
month
all right now I'll let the credits roll
and I'll see you soon for unrequited
episode three
blacklisted
[Music]
thank you
foreign
[Music]